induces significantly larger GABAergic inhibitory currents in the DSGC than depolarization of a SAC on the preferred side ( Fried et al., 2002 ; Vaney et al., 2012 ; Wei et al., 2011 ). Serial EM reconstructions of the SAC-DSGC circuit conclude that this asymmetry is due to a specific wiring of SAC processes that tend to form synapses onto a DSGC whose PD is oriented antiparallel to the SAC process ( Briggman et al., 2011 ). Hence the predominant model for retinal direction selectivity claims that the circuit is hard-wired, and that the wiring predicts the function. Nevertheless, we show that the receptive field properties of DSGCs are altered in the presence of on-going visual stimulation, to the extent that the cell’s directional preference fully reverses. Our results provide a powerful demonstration that in different sensory context, neural circuits can undergo dynamic configuration that alters their computation. Results Short visual stimulation can induce reversal of directional preference We used two-photon targeted cell-attached recordings from two transgenic mouse lines in which posterior preferring On-Off DSGCs express GFP: DRD4-GFP and TRHR-GFP ( Huberman et al., 2009 ; Rivlin-Etzion et al., 2011 ). The directional preference was established using a ”DS (Direction Selective) test” that consisted of 3–5 repetitions of square wave gratings drifting in 12 pseudo-randomly chosen directions. We used two measures to quantify the directional tuning as determined by this first DS test. First, we calculated the vector sum of the normalized responses where the length of the vector sum indicated the tuning strength while its direction defined the PD. Second, we calculated the direction selective index (DSI), a parameter that compares the firing rate in the PD to that in the ND. The values for DSI range between 0 and 1 with a higher value indicating greater firing towards the PD. If cells displayed a vector sum magnitude greater than 0.2 and a DSI greater than 0.3, they were classified as direction selective. As described previously ( Huberman et al., 2009 ; Kay et al., 2011 ; Rivlin-Etzion et al., 2011 ; Trenholm et al., 2011 ), all DRD4- and TRHR-GFP+ cells that showed direction selectivity were posteriorly tuned (74 out of 88 cells, 84%); the other cells (14 cells, 16%) were not sharply tuned and discarded from further analysis. Along with recording from genetically identified DS cells, we also recorded from a subset of non-GFP+ neurons that were On-Off DSGCs. After performing the first DS test, DS cells were presented with an adaptation protocol and then a second DS test to determine any change in their directional tuning ( Figures 1A and 2A ). We hypothesized that repeated stimulation in the PD would lead to a decrease in the PD response via depression, while repeated stimulation in the ND would lead to an increase in the ND response via training (as in Engert et al., Nature 2002 ). Therefore our first adaptation protocol, termed Preferred-Null (P-N) adaptation protocol, contained 40 s of gratings drifting in the PD, followed by 40 s of gratings drifting in the ND. Surprisingly, exposure to this protocol caused a significant subset of cells to switch their directional preference to the opposite direction, responding robustly to the original ND and weakly to their original PD (see examples in Figure 1A , Figure 2B,C ). Hence, short visual stimulation could reverse the directional tuning of these genetically identified populations of On-Off DSGCs (referred to here as ‘reversals’). The same reversal response to the P-N adaptation protocol was seen in non-GFP+ On-Off DSGCs with a different directional preference (n=3), indicating that the reversal can occur for multiple subtypes of On-Off DSGCs ( Figure 1B ). These reversals were highly robust. They were stable, lasting for the duration of the recording ( Figure 1 ; further analyzed below). In addition, they did not depend on the parameters of the grating that were used to assess directional tuning, such as spatial and temporal frequencies ( Figure S1 ). Specifically, the reversals occurred when the gratings in the DS test were symmetric (equal black and white phases), asymmetric (black phase of the grating was three times as long as the white phase, Figure 1A , Figure S1 ), had different speeds (15 or 30 deg/s), or had different spatial frequencies (ranging from 225 µm/cycle to 1800 µm/cycle). Since we observed cells reversing their directional preference in response to symmetric and asymmetric gratings of different properties, we combined cells subject to different DS tests in our analysis. Since individual DSGCs had varying responses to the P-N adaptation protocol, we assessed the change in directional preference using two measurements. 1) we classified adapted cells by the change in their PD by calculating the vector sum and the DSI based on the directional tuning that was acquired after the adaptation protocol. We termed the DSI computed using this newly acquired PD DSI*. If the adapted cell was sharply tuned (i.e., vector sum magnitude &gt; 0.2 and DSI* &gt; 0.3), the newly acquired PD was set to be the direction of the vector sum, and the change in PD was calculated as the angle difference between this new PD and the original PD. If this difference was less than 90 degrees, the adapted cell was classified as stable ( Figures S2A,B ), and if it was greater than 90 degrees, the adapted cell was classified as reversed ( Figures 1 and 2B ). If the cell was not sharply tuned after adaptation (i.e. vector sum magnitude &lt; 0.2 or DSI* &lt; 0.3), it was classified as ambiguous ( Figure S2C ). 2) we quantified the change in response along the original P-N axis. Here the DSI after adaptation was comparing the response to stimulus moving in the original PD and response to stimulus in the original ND (as in Trenholm et al. 2011 ). This is unlike DSI* where the computation is based on responses to motions in the adapted PD and ND. Thus, revers
