ed cells would exhibit negative DSI values since their response after adaptation to motion in the original PD is lower than their response after adaptation to motion in the original ND. Based on these two measures, we computed the efficacy of the adaptation protocol. The P-N adaptation protocol led to 38% of DSGCs (9 out of 24) showing reversal ( Figure 2C left), 38% (9 out of 24) becoming ambiguous in their directional tuning (i.e., non-DS), and the minority 25% (6 out of 24) remaining stable. Grouping data across all cells, we found that the P-N adaptation protocol led to a significant reduction in the DSI ( Figure 2C right, and Table S1 ). Hence, this adaptation protocol is able to change the directional preference of On-Off DSGCs. Multiple adaptation protocols induce changes in directional preference Next, we tested different adaptation protocols to determine the role of adaptive gratings in the reversal. Our second adaptation protocol, termed Null adaptation protocol, contained 40 s of gratings drifting only in the ND of the cell. This protocol also produced cells whose tuning was either reversed or ambiguous, but more cells remained stable than with the P-N protocol: 22% (4/18 cells) reversed, 22% (4/18) became ambiguous, and 56% (10/18) remained stable ( Figures 2D and E , left). Grouping data across all cells showed that the Null adaptation protocol significantly decreased DSI values ( Figure 2E right, Table S1 ). Hence, stimulation in the ND alone suffices in inducing reversal. Our third adaptation protocol, termed Preferred-Orthogonal (P-O) protocol, contained 40 s of gratings drifting in the PD, followed by 40 s of gratings drifting orthogonal to the P-N axis. This adaptation protocol also caused most cells to lose their original directional preference: 44% (4/9 cells) reversed, 22% (2/9) became ambiguous, and 33% (3/9) remained stable. Once again, the DSI values decreased significantly following this protocol ( Figure 2G , right; Table S1 ). However, surprisingly, the reversed cells exhibited a new PD that was similar to the original ND rather than the direction of the training stimulus ( Figures 2F and G left), suggesting that the adaptive stimulus drives reversal but does not instruct the direction of the reversal. Our fourth protocol, termed counter phase protocol, contained counter phase gratings where the gratings did not move but instead switched their colors from black to white in a frequency that was similar to the frequency of the moving gratings (4–8 Hz; Figure 2H ). Although the counterphase protocol changed the PD of some DSGCs – 25% (3/12 cells) reversed, 17% (2/12) became ambiguous, and 58% (7/12) remained stable ( Figure 2I left) – they did not produce a significant decrease in the DSI across the population ( Figure 2I right, Table S1 ). Hence, motion in the adaptive stimuli is not critical for reversal but it increases its probability. As a control for our various protocols, we took a group of cells and performed consecutive DS tests separated by a gray screen that appeared for 5–9 minutes (comparable to the time between 1 st and 2 nd DS tests in the P-N adaptation protocol). The control protocol did not reverse any cell’s PD, but some cells did become ambiguous (36% or 4/11 cells). However, the DSI values in this control group did not change significantly ( Figure S2D right, Table S1 ). In addition, we presented the P-N adaptation protocol prior to recording from the cell and found that the majority of the cells (n = 5/8) had a reversed directional preference, indicating that the reversals were not due to the recording itself. Reversed cells and stable cells are not inherently different We next addressed the issue of why some cells reverse after exposure to a given adaptation protocol while others do not. First, we exposed a subset of stable and ambiguous DSGCs to either an additional adaptation protocol and DS test or just an additional DS test. This additional stimulation caused several of these cells to reverse ( Figure S2E,F ), indicating stable cells can become reversed cells. Second, we compared the tuning properties prior to adaptation of the cells that reversed and those that remained stable, and we found that the stable cells tended to be more sharply tuned (the DSI values for stable cells were 0.78±0.19, and for reversed cells were 0.63±0.23, mean±SD; P&lt;0.02, Mann-Whitney test; the vector sum magnitude values for stable cells were 0.53±0.17, and for reversed cells were 0.38±0.17, P&lt;0.01, Mann-Whitney test; Figures S2G, S3A,B ). This suggests that cells are more difficult to reverse when their original tuning is sharp. Third, both stable and reversed cells responded to adaptation by significantly reducing their firing rates to the original PD (from 9.95±5.42 Hz to 2.73±2.68 Hz for reversed cells, p&lt;0.01; and from 10.38±8.53 Hz to 5.85±5.31 Hz for stable cells, p&lt;0.02, Mann-Whitney test; Figures S2G, S3C, examples in Figure S2A,B ). In addition, there was no correlation between a cell’s ability to reverse and the age or genotype of the mouse ( Figure S3D,E ). Altogether, these data suggest that DSGCs that remain stable and those that reverse are not inherently different but rather their likelihood to reverse depends on their initial tuning. Newly acquired PD is restricted to the P-N axis and is highly robust Combining the data across all stimulation protocols and categorizing the results from their final DS tests, we found that most cells significantly altered their directional tuning following exposure to an adaptation protocol (30/74 DSGCs reversed, 15/74 became ambiguous, and 29/74 remained stable). Interestingly, regardless of the adaptation protocols, none of the cells acquired a preference for the direction orthogonal to the original P-N axis. Instead, the PD after adaptation was either close to the original PD (for stable cells) or towards the original ND (for reversed cells, Figure 2J ). To investigate the stability of the reversal
