, we used a subset of cells for which we maintained recordings and continued to perform DS tests after the reversal. All cells in these experiments maintained their reversed directional preference for the extent of the recording (ranging from 2–23 minutes, n=9 cells). Thus, the reversal induced by visual stimulation is apparently robust and long lasting. Newly acquired PD is mediated by inhibition Direction selectivity is dependent on GABA-A receptor mediated inhibition ( Ariel and Daw, 1982 ; Caldwell et al., 1978 ; Kittila and Massey, 1997 ; Massey et al., 1997 ; Wei et al., 2011 ). To determine if this inhibition also mediates the newly acquired PD, we bath applied a GABA-A blocker (gabazine, 5 µM) after the directional preference of GFP+ DSGCs was reversed. In all cases, this application abolished the DS response and increased the response to stimuli in all directions (n=4, Figure 3A, B ). These findings distinguish reversal described here from paradoxical reversal of the PD and ND that has been reported in the presence of GABA blockers ( Ackert et al., 2009 ; Grzywacz et al., 1997 ; Smith et al., 1996 ; Trenholm et al., 2011 ). To determine whether synaptic input to the DSGCs changes after exposure to an adaptation protocol, we conducted whole-cell voltage clamp recordings. Before adaptation, the total integrated inhibitory current was larger for the ND than the PD, while the excitatory current exhibited a PD preference (n=9; Figure 3C, D ; Figure S4A ), as has been seen previously ( Fried et al., 2002 ; Taylor et al., 2000 ; Trenholm et al., 2011 ; Weng et al., 2005 ). After adaptation, inhibitory current was larger for the new ND (the original PD) and excitatory current was larger for the new PD (the original ND) (n=9; Figure 3C, D ; Figure S4B ). This finding confirms that the newly acquired directional preference is mediated by asymmetric inhibition, though this asymmetry is smaller after adaptation than before. Moreover, both before and after adaptation, inhibitory and excitatory currents began simultaneously in response to ND gratings indicating that shunting inhibition plays a role in the selectivity of the newly acquired direction ( Vaney et al., 2012 ; Wei and Feller, 2011 ). Reversal alters the timing of the response relative to stimulation Our voltage clamp recordings showed not only changes in the relative amplitude of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs onto DSGCs, but also changes in the timing of the responses relative to the stimulus after adaptation ( Figure 3C , Figure S4 ). To better characterize the timing of the DSGC response to DS test, we extracellularly monitored action potential firing. We found that throughout the presentation of grating stimuli, action potential firing was maintained ( Figure 4A left, B left; Figure S5 left). In addition, the firing rate in a given direction did not change between the 3–5 repetitions throughout a DS test (data not shown). Therefore, we averaged the firing of a DSGC in response to one cycle of grating stimulation in either the PD or the ND, before and after adaptation protocol ( Figures 4A,B right). We found that, before adaptation, two distinct peaks were clearly defined in the post stimulus time histogram (PSTH) of PD stimulation, but after reversal, the response pattern to the newly acquired PD greatly varied because there was a significant delay of one peak. Reversed cells assessed by different grating parameters also displayed similar delayed response ( Figure S5A,B right), whereas no delay was detected for stable cells ( Figure S5C,D right). This finding indicates that the reversal is not caused simply by changes in the synaptic strength of the original circuit that mediated the DSGC’s directional response, but by activating an additional circuit. On pathway blockade reveals a role for crossover circuits in adaptation Classically, directional responses in the On and Off pathways of DSGCs are thought to be mediated by independent channels ( Famiglietti and Kolb, 1976 ; Nelson et al., 1978 ; Schiller, 1992 ). Recently, however, there is growing evidence that, in the inner retina, crosstalk between the On and Off pathways generated via crossover circuits can change the receptive field properties of retinal ganglion cells ( Demb and Singer, 2012 ; Munch et al., 2009 ). To test if crosstalk contributes to the reversal that we see, we blocked the On pathway using an mGluR6 agonist, L-AP4 (5–20 µM), that blocks input from photoreceptors to On bipolar cells ( Slaughter and Miller, 1981 ). As expected, in the presence of L-AP4 (n = 24), all DSGCs showed no On response to stationary spots. The majority of these cells exhibited Off responses that were directionally tuned toward posterior directions (75%, 18/24 cells; Figure 5A ), as previously described ( Kittila and Massey, 1995 ). The remaining cells (25%, 6/24) were classified as non-DS. However, three of the non-DS cells displayed Off responses that were tuned to both posterior and anterior directions, making these cells axial selective rather than direction selective ( Figure 5B ; Figures S6A and S6B ). In addition, four of the directionally tuned cells also presented a response toward both directions, but the responses toward the ND were significantly smaller than the responses toward the PD. Interestingly, in these axial selective cells, the timing of the response relative to stimulation in the ND was different than the timing relative to stimulation in the PD ( Figure S6C , top). This implies that before adaptation, the delayed Off response to stimulation in the original ND is masked by the On pathway. Hence, crosstalk between the On and Off pathways must normally contribute to the On-Off DSGC’s directional preference. Presenting the adaptation protocol to direction-selective and axial-selective cells (n = 21) in the presence of L-AP4 led to several changes in their responses to visual stimulation. First, a significant percentage of cells stopped responding to gratings (29%, 6/21), indicating that without On pathway signaling, a subset of cells loses its response to stimulation in the original PD and does not gain a new PD response. Second, cells that continued to respond to gratings showed reduced directional tuning (mean DSI decreased from 0.54±0.23 to 0.18±0.63), with 20% (3 out of 15) exhibiting a reversed PD ( Figure 5A,B ). Interestingly, the response timing relative to the stimulus resembled the timing relative to the stimulus when ND stimulation was given to axial selective cells before adaptation ( Figure S6C ), indicating that the circuit mediating the ND response before adaptation in L-AP4 is identical to the circuit mediating the reversed response after adaptation. Third, after adaptation, 40% (6/15 cells) of the direction-selective and axial-selective cells exhibited an On response to a spot test ( Figures 5A ; Figures S6A and S6B ). Since L-AP4 blocks the input from photoreceptors to On bipolar cells, we conclude that these On resp
