Nature Nature 319 nihpa Nature 0028-0836 1476-4687 pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title NIHPA Author Manuscripts PMC4724341 PMC4724341.1 4724341 4724341 NIHMS739303 26735013 10.1038/nature16468 NIHMS739303 NIHPA739303 1 Article The functional diversity of retinal ganglion cells in the mouse Baden Tom 1 2 3 § Berens Philipp 1 2 3 4 § Franke Katrin 1 2 3 5 § Rosón Miroslav Román 1 2 3 5 Bethge Matthias 1 2 6 Euler Thomas 1 2 3 1 Bernstein Centre for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany 2 Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany 3 Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tübingen, Germany 4 Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA 5 Graduate School of Neural & Behavioural Sciences | International Max Planck Research School, University of Tübingen, Germany 6 Max Planck Institute of Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Thomas Euler ( thomas.euler@cin.uni-tuebingen.de ) § These authors contributed equally to the presented work 06 1 2016 21 1 2016 529 7586 263989 345 350 20 11 2015 06 07 2016 06 07 2016 07 06 2016 05 06 2024 Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms SUMMARY In the vertebrate visual system, all output of the retina is carried by retinal ganglion cells. Each type encodes distinct visual features in parallel for transmission to the brain. How many such “output channels” exist and what each encodes is an area of intense debate. In mouse, anatomical estimates range between 15–20 channels, and only a handful are functionally understood. Combining two-photon calcium imaging to obtain dense retinal recordings and unsupervised clustering of the resulting sample of >11,000 cells, we here show that the mouse retina harbours substantially more than 30 functional output channels. These include all known and several new ganglion cell types, as verified by genetic and anatomical criteria. Therefore, information channels from the mouse’s eye to the mouse’s brain are considerably more diverse than shown thus far by anatomical studies, suggesting an encoding strategy resembling that used in state-of-the-art artificial vision systems. pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript yes pmc-prop-open-manuscript yes pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement yes pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes Visual processing begins in the retina (reviewed in ). Here, photoreceptors feed into bipolar cells 1 , which provide input to a diverse set of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). Each type of RGC tiles the retinal surface and extracts specific features of the visual scene for transmission to the brain. However, it is still unclear how many such parallel retinal “feature channels” exist, and what they encode. 2 Early studies classified cells into ON, OFF or ON-OFF and transient or sustained types (e.g. ) based on the response of individual RGCs to light stimulation. These studies also identified RGC types selective for local motion, motion direction or uniform illumination 3 , 4 . In the most complete physiological survey to date, Farrow and Masland 3 , 5 – 7 clustered ~450 mouse RGCs by their light responses into 12+ functional types using multi electrode array (MEA) recordings, suggesting a similar number of feature channels in the retina. In contrast, anatomical classifications of RGC dendritic morphologies estimated around 15–20 types (e.g. 8 ). Recently, Sümbül and co-workers 9 – 12 found 16+ types using unsupervised clustering together with genetic markers. If each of these anatomically distinct types performed one function, there should be no more than ~20 retinal output channels. 10 Commonly, RGCs of the same “genuine” type are thought to share the same physiology, morphology, intra-retinal connectivity, retinal mosaic, immunohistochemical profile and genetic markers. Whether these features suffice to define a type and how classification schemes should be organised is the matter of a long-standing debate . For example, if also axonal projections were considered type-specific, this could result in a much greater variety of retinal output channels. In zebrafish, RGCs show at least 50 unique combinations of “dendro-axonal RGC morphologies” targeting a total of 10 anatomically defined projection fields 13 – 16 . RGCs in mice project to 40+ targets 17 , suggesting that there may be an even larger number of mouse RGC types. 18 Reliably recording from all RGC types Here, we sought to test this idea and determine the number of functional output channels of the mouse retina, to obtain a complete picture of what the mouse’s eye tells the mouse’s brain. We used two-photon Ca 2+ imaging to record light-evoked activity in all cells within a patch of the ganglion cell layer (GCL). Cells were loaded with the fluorescent Ca 2+ indicator Oregon-Green BAPTA-1 (OGB-1) by bulk electroporation ( 19 Fig. 1a ). This approach resulted in near-complete (>92%) staining of GCL cells, with less than 1% damaged cells 1,2 . To acquire a patch of several hundreds of cells, we recorded up to 9 neighbouring 110 × 110 μm fields (at 7.8 Hz), each containing 80 ± 20 GCL somata ( 20 Fig. 1a , cf. 1,2 SI Video 1 ). In total, >11,000 cells were sampled. We presented four light-stimuli ( Fig. 1b ): ( i ) a full-field “chirp”-stimulus to characterise polarity, kinetics and the preference for temporal frequencies and contrasts, ( ii ) a moving bar to probe for direction and orientation selectivity ( Fig. 1b ), ( 2 iii ) binary dense noise to estimate receptive fields and ( iv ) an alternating long- / short-wavelength (“green/blue”) full-field stimulus to probe for chromatic preference ( Methods ). This set of stimuli was chosen to cover a large stimulus-space that distinguishes different response types. We performed recordings in the ventral retina, as verified by the mean chromatic response preference of each imaged field ( 21 , 22 Extended Data Fig. E1e ), to control for retinotopic sources of variability . In addition, we always presented stimuli at the same light levels in the low photopic regime ( 23 – 25 Methods ). Our approach allowed us to determine the soma size and position of each recorded cell. Immunohistochemistry ( Methods ) was used in a subset of experiments: displaced amacrine cells (dACs), which are GABAergic and/or cholinergic and represent a substantial fraction of GCL somata , were labelled for GAD67 and ChAT ( 26 Fig. 1c ; n =522 of 1,584 cells; double-labelled: n =96). Melanopsin-labelling identified strongly melanopsin-expressing intrinsically-photosensitive RGCs (ipRGCs, 27 , 28 n =18 of 905 cells). SMI-32 labelled a small set of GCL cells ( n =85 of 1,912 cells), including starburst dACs , and was used to identify alpha RGCs (large, strongly-labelled somata 29 ). In addition, we performed recordings in two transgenic lines, PV and Pcp2 ( 9 , 23 Methods ; Fig. 1d ), to relate individual recorded cells to known genetically-defined populations. Finally, we made electrical single-cell recordings from RGCs ( n =84) followed by dye-filling to reconstruct their dendritic morphology ( Fig. 1e ). For all cells with Ca 1 2+ and spike activity recorded simultaneously ( n =17), Ca 2+ responses estimated from spike trains closely resembled measured Ca 2+ responses ( Fig. 1e ; 2 Extended Data Fig. E1a–d ). A probabilistic clustering framework Combining locally complete optical population recordings, genetic and immunohistochemical labels, as well as electrical measurements, yielded a comprehensive dataset of GCL cell light responses to a set of standardised visual stimuli. This provided the unprecedented opportunity for an unbiased characterisation of the retinal output. Since the dataset (11,210 cells, n =50 retinas; Extended Data Fig. E2 ) is too complex to be interpreted manually (e.g. ), we used a clustering approach, making our analysis as objective and quantitative as possible. 30 In the first step, we used an automatic unsupervised clustering procedure to identify response prototypes of GCL cells ( Extended Data Fig. E2d,e ; 1 Methods ). Specifically, we used sparse Principal Component Analysis (sPCA) to extract features from the light-driven Ca 2+ signals of the GCL cells ( Methods ), which identified many classically used temporal response features such as ON- and OFF responses with different kinetics or selectivity to different temporal frequencies. We then used a Mixture of Gaussian model on this feature set for clustering ( Methods ). In the second step, we post-processed the clustered data to make it accessible for interpretation, including the identification of clusters corresponding to dAC types based on GAD67 staining and isolation of alpha RGCs with large somata from similarly responding cells ( 9 Extended Data Fig. E2e ). The validity of this step was verified in detail below (see 2 ,f–h Example RGC types ). Finally, we arranged the clusters according to a hierarchical tree based on their functional similarity ( Methods ) and suggest a grouping scheme based on available domain-knowledge ( Fig. 2a–c ). Some groups span different branches, as the tree was solely based on the functional response features. This framework yielded a total of 46 groups ( n =7,982 cells, 71.2% of all cells, Extended Data Fig. E2f ), divided into 32 RGC groups ( n =5,024, 62.9% of grouped cells; including 4 groups, G 29–32 , from “uncertain” clusters) and 14 dAC groups ( n =2,958, 37.1% of grouped cells). The estimated fraction of dACs (between 37.1% and 50.6%, if including all “uncertain” groups) is within the expected range . We did not analyse dACs in detail (see 26 Extended Data Fig. E3a–c ; SI Video 2; SI Data 1 ). 50–75 ; SI Discussion A minimum of 32 mouse RGC types The identified 32 RGC groups comprised non-DS (9 OFF, 12 ON, 3 ON-OFF) and DS (2 ON-OFF, 4 ON, 2 OFF) groups ( Fig. 2a–c ; SI Data 2 ) and accounted for all known RGC types in the mouse retina 1–32 . This includes groups corresponding to three alpha types 15 (G 31 5,8,24 , see also below), ON-OFF (G 32 12,13 ) and ON DS types (G 33 16,25,26,29 ), JAM-B (ref ) (G 24 6 ) and W3 cell (G 25 10 ), and the OFF “suppressed-by-contrast” cell (G 34 31,32 ). The allocation of cells to individual groups was uniform across space ( Fig. 2d ) and the fraction of the population accounted for by broad response types was consistent across experiments ( Extended Data Fig. E3e ). As each RGC type is thought to tile the retina, we calculated each group’s functional coverage factor (CF) based on its average receptive field (RF) size and its relative abundance ( Extended Data Fig. E4 ; Methods ). A single RGC type would yield a CF of 1 without RF overlap, and a CF of ~2 with 30% overlap. A CF<<1 may indicate that a type has been artificially split. The average CF across all RGC groups was 2.0 ± 0.7 (mean ± s.d. of Gaussian fit, Fig. 2e ), broadly consistent with reported CFs for mouse RGCs (roughly 2–3; see SI Table 1 and SI Discussion ). CFs higher than 2 may indicate groups consisting of multiple types: For example, G 12 corresponding to ON-OFF DS cells (cf. 32 Fig. 4a ), has a CF of 7.7, consistent with 4 ON-OFF DS types, each preferring a different motion direction (see below). The mixed non-DS groups G 35 17 and G 31 likely contain more than one type, supported by multiple distinct morphologies and genetic identities (e.g. G 31,32 , Extended Data Fig. E5 ) or response properties (e.g. G 17 , see below). Taken together, our CF analysis suggests that the number of unique functional RGC types in the mouse is substantially above 32, likely as high as 40, in particular since classical ipRGCs (i.e. M1) as well as at least one PV-positive small-field RGC type were largely discarded based on their low S/N response to our stimuli (see SI Discussion ). This is about three times the highest number of physiologically defined RGC types to date and about twice the highest anatomical diversity reported in mouse 8 ( 11 SI Table 2 ). Example RGC types There are three types of alpha cells known in the mouse retina : the sustained (G 31 5 ) and transient OFF alpha (G 8 ) and the ON alpha (G 24 ). These cells are characterised by their large somata, a feature that we used during the post-processing step ( Extended Data Fig. E2g–h ). For the transient OFF and the ON alpha we found similarly responding cells with smaller somata, which we named transient OFF “mini” (G 9 ) and ON “mini” alpha cell (G 23 ), respectively ( Fig. 3a–d ). For the sustained OFF alpha (G 5 ) we did not identify an obvious “mini”-version. We tested whether these pairs consisted of distinct types using SMI-32 immunohistochemistry on a subset of cells ( n =1,912, Fig. 3e,f ). These immunolabels were not used during post-processing ( Extended Data Fig. E2e ). In an example field, all “classical” alpha cells were SMI-32-positive (#1–3; 2 Fig. 3e ). In contrast, two ON mini alphas (#4) had smaller somata and were SMI-32-negative, despite a response profile similar to the ON alpha. Across our entire set of stained cells, transient OFF and ON alpha cells were consistently SMI-32-positive, while their respective mini counterparts were not ( Fig. 3f , p<0.01, generalised linear model, Methods ). In addition, ON alphas, unlike their mini counterparts, were PV-positive (n ONalpha =16/26 vs. n ONalpha-mini =1/37, SI Data 2 ). Finally, alpha and mini alpha types formed independent mosaics ( 23,24 Fig. 3a ). Transient OFF mini alpha cells ( 2 –d 2 n =2) stratified similarly to transient OFF alpha cells ( n =5), but with smaller dendritic arbours, consistent with their smaller RFs ( Fig. 2c ; SI Data 2 ; for statistics, see 8,9 Fig. 3 (legend)). The same was the case for ON alpha and mini alpha RGCs ( SI Data 2 ). Together, these data argue that indeed alphas and mini alphas are distinct cell types. The OFF sustained alpha was only moderately SMI-32-immunoreactive ( 23,24 Fig. 3f ), consistent with previous reports . An additional, weakly SMI-32-positive RGC group with large somata (#5 in 23 Fig. 3e ) was dubbed “ON transient, large” (G 19 ). The classical “local edge detector” (ref ) or W3 cell 36 likely corresponds to G 25 10 ( Extended Data Fig. E6a,b ). This type had small somata and RFs, and responded poorly to full-field stimuli. Instead, G 10 cells reliably responded to moving bars with a brisk burst at the leading and trailing edge, consistent with previous reports . Intracellular filling confirmed the cell’s morphological identity ( 25 Extended Data Fig. E6a ). A second group, G 3 11 , had similar response properties with a reduced leading-edge response, potentially corresponding to a W3 variant . 25 Contrast-suppressed RGCs (e.g. ) occur in many species and a type of OFF supressed-by-contrast (Sbc) cell has recently been described in mouse 37 , 38 (G 34 31 ). We found a new ON Sbc cell type (G 28 ), which responded slowly to a full-field increase in light level but was suppressed by temporal contrast ( Extended Data Fig. E6c,d ). One candidate morphology diffusively stratified across the entire IPL while another stratified exclusively in the ON layer. Direction and orientation selectivity Our RGC groups contained n =1,757 DS cells (35% of RGCs; Extended Data Fig. E7a–d ; Methods ). Most DS cells (70%) were sorted into 8 groups (G 2,6,12,13,16,25,26,29 ). This high functional diversity among DS cells is in agreement with studies of DS RGC-specific transgenic mouse lines . Further DS clusters were grouped with functionally similar non-DS counterparts (G 39 4 , 18 , 28 ), as they contained less cells than the matching non-DS clusters. These may include RGCs with slightly asymmetric dendritic arbours (e.g. ) that could lead to directional bias in response to motion. Classically, these cells are not considered DS. 10 To identify the motion axes of DS groups, we registered the orientation of the retina in a subset of experiments ( n =3,830 cells, n =12 retinas, Fig. 4 ; Extended Data Fig. E7e,f ). Three DS groups largely preferred one direction: the ON DS transient (G 16 ), the JAM-B RGC (G 24 6 ) and one of the sustained ON DS cells (G 25 ) preferred backward, upward and forward motion, respectively. The other DS groups responded to more than one direction. The two groups of ON-OFF DS cells (G 12,13 ) contain the four classical subtypes , with room for additional ones, as suggested by genetics and central projections (e.g. 32 ; 40 SI Discussion ). The three classical sustained ON DS types are included in G 33 25,26,29 . We found two OFF DS groups (G 2,6 ), with G 6 containing JAM-B RGCs . These cells responded weakly to ON and strongly to OFF light changes, consistent with the JAM-B’s polarity switch with stimulus size. In addition, we identified a new OFF DS cell (G 24 2 , Extended Data Fig. E6e,f ). This group did not co-stratify with the ChAT bands, which play a role in most known DS circuits (reviewed in ). Morphology, response profile, and directional preference of G 39 2 suggests that these cells are not the JAM-B RGCs (see above). As predicted by recordings from mouse lateral geniculate nucleus and superior colliculus 41 , we identified 42 n =730 (14.5%) orientation selective (OS) RGCs ( Fig. 4b ). While most RGC groups contained only few OS cells, G 1,14,17,30 contained disproportionately more (~30% each). (ON-)OFF OS cells (G 14 ) were selective for vertical and horizontal orientations, whereas ON transient OS cells (G 17 ) included many preferred orientations, consistent with its CF of 7. Additional experiments with contrast inversed moving and stationary bars ( n =826 cells) revealed further functional diversity in response to these stimuli among G 17 cells ( Extended Data Fig. E7g–i ; SI Discussion ). Genetic and anatomical RGC types To link RGC groups to genetically-defined populations, we performed a subset of our experiments in the PV (ref ) and Pcp2 (ref 43 ) transgenic mouse lines ( 44 Extended Data Figs. E5 , E8 ; n PV =173 cells in 24 retinas, n Pcp2 =15 cells in 3 retinas). PV- and Pcp2-positive cells were sorted into 20 (PV a-t ) and 6 (Pcp2 a–f ) groups ( Extended Data Fig. E5b–d ), with 14 and 3 of the groups containing n≥3 genetically-labelled cells, respectively. In case of the PV-line, many matches were very robust (e.g. the ON alpha cells: G 24 or PV r or “PV1” from ). Nevertheless, the count of ≥14 functional types in the PV line is much higher than the previously described eight PV types 45 , suggesting higher functional diversity than appreciated in earlier studies ( 45 SI Discussion ). Next, we used our comparatively small sample of n =84 morphologically reconstructed cells to link functional groups to anatomically defined types. In many cases, it was possible to identify likely morphologies for functional RGC groups ( Extended Data Fig. E9 ; SI Discussion ). To generate an approximate mapping of functional groups to dendritic depth profiles in the IPL ( Fig. 5 ), we averaged the stratification profiles of all reconstructed cells, weighted by the correlation coefficient between each cell’s light response and the functional group average (to full-field “chirp” and moving bars; Methods ). The resulting map reproduced many known principles of inner retinal organisation. For example, OFF (G 1–9 ) and sustained ON (G 21–24;27,28,30 ) groups mostly stratified in the upper and lower half of the IPL (ref ) and groups with more transient responses closer to the centre (e.g. G 4 1,2,8–10,20 ) . Most groups corresponding to known types had expected stratification profiles (e.g. W3, ON-OFF DS and classical alphas) with few exceptions (e.g. G 46 , 47 6,11,18,19 ). For example, our prediction was for the JAM-B (G 6 ) to stratify mainly below the ChAT-band, while the cell is known to stratify above it, as it also does in our individual examples ( Extended Data Fig. E9a ). This is likely caused by many cell types with responses comparable to those of the JAM-B confounding the G 6 IPL profile. Conclusions We found that a minimum of 32 different functional types of RGCs could be distinguished based on their light responses and basic anatomical criteria. The unusually high abundance of some of these functional types and evidence from immunohistochemistry suggests that further sub-divisions are needed. Accordingly, the number of distinct visual feature channels available to the mouse’s brain appears to be two- to threefold that of previous estimates. Taken together, our RGC groups cover a broad range of “classical” features such as polarity, receptive field size, frequency and contrast sensitivity ( Extended Data Fig. E10 ). In particular, RGC groups broadly span feature-dimensions such as response polarity and their preference for global vs. local stimuli. Less balanced is the temporal frequency selectivity, with only a few groups preferring high frequencies, in particular for groups with low contrast preference. We verified our suggested functional classification by showing that most ( i ) functionally defined types ( ii ) exhibited a similar CF, ( iii ) some could be linked to genetically defined populations and ( iv ) had consistent morphology/dendritic stratification profiles in the IPL. Nonetheless, our definitions certainly remain incomplete; the classification of mouse RGCs will need to be refined by the expansion of the probed stimulus space, the use of cell-type selective genetic lines or single-cell transcriptomics 40 , and integration with data from large-scale EM 48 . However, even our comparatively basic analysis already reveals a large diversity in feature coding by mouse RGCs, very different from how digital cameras encode images, rather resembling an encoding strategy used in state-of-the-art artificial vision systems 49 . In the future, the “fingerprint” of different functional RGC types introduced here can provide a frame of reference for systematic investigations of feature coding by RGCs and for detecting functional changes in degenerated retina. 50 METHODS Animals and tissue preparation All procedures were performed in accordance with the law on animal protection issued by the German Federal Government (Tierschutzgesetz) and approved by the institutional animal welfare committee of the University of Tübingen. For all experiments, we used 4- to 8-week-old mice of either sex. In addition to C57Bl6 (wild-type) mice, we used the transgenic lines Pvalb Cre (“PV”, JAX 008069, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, US; ), Pcp2 43 Cre (“Pcp2”, JAX 006207; ) and ChAT 44 Cre (JAX 006410; ), cross-bred with the red fluorescence Cre-dependent reporter line Ai9:tdTomato (JAX 007905). Due to the exploratory nature of our study, we did not use randomization and blinding. 51 Animals were housed under a standard 12 hr day/night rhythm. For activity recordings, animals were dark-adapted for ≥1 h, then anesthetised with isoflurane (Baxter) and killed by cervical dislocation. The eyes were enucleated and hemisected in carboxygenated (95% O 2 , 5% CO 2 ) artificial cerebral spinal fluid (ACSF) solution containing (in mM): 125 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 2 CaCl 2 , 1 MgCl 2 , 1.25 NaH 2 PO 4 , 26 NaHCO 3 , 20 glucose, and 0.5 L-glutamine (pH 7.4). Bulk electroporation of the fluorescent Ca 2+ indicator Oregon-Green BAPTA-1 (OGB-1) into the ganglion cell layer (GCL) was carried out as described before . In brief, the retina was dissected from the eyecup, flat-mounted onto an Anodisc (#13, 0.2 um pore size, GE Healthcare, Maidstone, UK) with the GCL facing up, and placed between two 4 mm horizontal plate electrodes (CUY700P4E/L, Nepagene/Xceltis, Meckesheim, Germany). A 10 μl drop of 5 mM OGB-1 (hexapotassium salt; Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany) in ACSF was suspended from the upper electrode and lowered onto the retina. After application of 10–12 pulses (+9 V, 100 ms pulse width, at 1 Hz) from a pulse generator/wide-band amplifier combination (TGP110 and WA301, Thurlby handar/Farnell, Oberhaching, Germany), the tissue was moved to the recording chamber of the microscope, where it was continuously perfused with carboxygenated ACSF at ~37°C and left to recover for ~60 minutes before the recordings started. In all experiments with wild-type mice, ACSF contained ~0.1 μM Sulforhodamine-101 (SR101, Invitrogen) to reveal blood vessels and any damaged cells in the red fluorescence channel 19 , 47 . All procedures were carried out under very dim red (>650 nm) light. 20 Two-photon Ca 2+ imaging and light stimulation We used a MOM-type two-photon microscope (designed by W. Denk, MPI, Martinsried; purchased from Sutter Instruments/Science Products, Hofheim, Germany). Design and procedures were described previously . In brief, the system was equipped with a mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser (MaiTai-HP DeepSee, Newport Spectra-Physics, Darmstadt, Germany) tuned to 927 nm, two fluorescence detection channels for OGB-1 (HQ 510/84, AHF/Chroma Tübingen, Germany) and SR101 (HQ 630/60, AHF), and a water immersion objective (W Plan-Apochromat 20x/1,0 DIC M27, Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). For image acquisition, we used custom-made software (ScanM, by M. Müller, MPI, Martinsried, and T.E.) running under IGOR Pro 6.3 for Windows (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR), taking 64 × 64 pixel image sequences (7.8 frames/s) for activity scans or 512 × 512 pixel images for high-resolution morphology scans. 20 For light stimulation, we focused a DLP projector (K11, Acer) through the objective, fitted with band-pass-filtered light-emitting diodes (LEDs) (“green”, 578 BP 10; and “blue”, HC 405 BP 10, AHF/Croma) that roughly match the spectral sensitivity of moose M- and S-opsins. LEDs were synchronised with the microscope’s scan retrace. Stimulator intensity (as photoisomerisation rate, 10 3 P*/s/cone) was calibrated as described previously to range from 0 (LEDs off) to 10.8 and 9.9 for M- and S-opsins, respectively. Due to two-photon excitation of photopigments, an additional, steady illumination component of ~10 52 4 P*/s/cone was present during the recordings (for detailed discussion, see ). For all experiments, the tissue was kept at a constant intensity level (see stimuli below) for at least 30 s after the laser scanning started before light stimuli were presented. Four types of light stimulus were used ( 22 Fig. 1b , top): ( i ) Full-field “chirp” stimulus consisting of a bright step and two sinusoidal intensity modulations, one with increasing frequency and one with increasing contrast, ( ii ) 0.3 × 1 mm bright bar moving at 1 mm/s in 8 directions , ( 19 iii ) alternating blue and green 3 s flashes, and ( iv ) binary dense noise, a 20×15 matrix with 40 μm pixel-side length; each pixel displayed an independent, perfectly balanced random sequence at 5 Hz yielding a total running time of 5 minutes for receptive field (RF) mapping. In some experiments, we used in addition dark moving bars (like (ii) but contrast-inversed), and stationary bright or dark 0.2 × 0.8 mm bars flashed for 1 s in 6 orientations (see Extended Data Fig. E7g–i ). Except for ( iii ), stimuli were achromatic, with matched photo-isomerisation rates for M- and S-opsins. Single-cell electrophysiology, dye filling and morphological reconstruction TdTomato- or OGB-1- labelled RGCs were targeted using two-photon imaging for juxtacellular recordings using borosilicate electrodes (4–6 MΩ) filled with ACSF with added SR101 (250 μM). Data were acquired using an Axoclamp-900A or Axopatch 200A amplifier in combination with a Digidata 1440 (all: Molecular Devices, Biberach-an-der-Riss, Germany), digitised at 10 kHz and analysed off-line using IGOR Pro. We presented the same light stimuli as for the Ca 2+ imaging. In some experiments, electrical recordings and Ca 2+ imaging was performed simultaneously. After the recording, the membrane under the electrode was opened using a voltage “buzz” to let the cell fill with dye by diffusion for approximately 30 minutes; then 2P image stacks were acquired to document the cell’s morphology. Filled cells were traced semi-automatically offline using the Simple Neurite Tracer plugin implemented in Fiji ( http://fiji.sc/Fiji ), yielding cell skeletons. If necessary, we used the original image stack to correct the skeletons for any warping of the IPL using custom-written scripts in IGOR Pro. To this end, we employed the SR101-stained blood vessel plexuses on either side of the IPL as landmarks to define the IPL borders (see below). Only cells where the filling quality allowed full anatomical reconstruction were used for analysis (see below). Immunohistochemistry Following Ca 2+ imaging, retinas were mounted onto filter paper (0.8 μm pore size, Millipore) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (in PBS) for 15 min at 4°C. Immunolabelling was performed using antibodies against ChAT (choline-acetyltransferase; goat anti-ChAT, 1:100, AB144P, Millipore), GAD67 (glutamate decarboxylase; mouse anti-GAD67, 1:100, MAB5046, Millipore), SMI-32 (mouse anti-SMI32, 1:100, SMI-32R-100, Covance), and melanopsin (rabbit anti-melanopsin, 1:4000, AB-N38, Advanced Targeting Systems) for 4 days. Secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor conjugates (1:750, 16 hours, Life Technologies). For each retina, the recorded region was identified by the local blood vessel pattern and confirmed by comparing size and position of individual somata in the GCL. Image stacks were acquired on a confocal microscope (Nikon Eclipse C1) equipped with a x60 oil objective (1.4 NA). The degree of immunolabelling of GCL cells was evaluate and rated (from 0, negative, to 4 positive) using z-stacks. Attribution of labelled somata to recorded ones was performed manually using ImageJ ( http://imagej.nih.gov/ij ) and IGOR Pro. Data analysis Data analysis was performed using Matlab 2012 and 2014a (The Mathworks Inc., Ismaning, Germany), and IGOR Pro. Data were organised in a custom written schema using the DataJoint for Matlab framework ( https://github.com/datajoint/datajoint-matlab ; D. Yatsenko, Tolias lab, Baylor College of Medicine). Pre-processing Regions of interest (ROIs), corresponding to somata in the GCL, were defined semi-automatically by custom software (“CellLab” by D. Velychko, CIN) based on a high resolution (512x512 pixels) image stack of the recorded field. Then, the Ca 2+ traces for each ROI were extracted (as ΔF/F ) using the IGOR Pro-based image analysis toolbox SARFIA ( http://www.igorexchange.com/project/SARFIA ). A stimulus time marker embedded in the recording data served to align the Ca 2+ traces relative to the visual stimulus with a temporal precision of 2 ms. Stimulus-aligned Ca 2+ traces for each ROI were imported into Matlab for further analysis. First, we de-trended the Ca 2+ traces by high-pass filtering above ~0.1 Hz. For all stimuli except the dense noise (for RF mapping), we then subtracted the baseline (median of first 8 samples), computed the median activity r(t) across stimulus repetitions (typically 3–5 repetitions) and normalised it such that . max t ( | r ( t ) | ) = 1 Receptive field mapping We mapped the linear RFs of the neurons by computing the Ca 2+ transient-triggered average. To this end, we resampled the temporal derivative of the Ca 2+ response at 10-times the stimulus frequency and used Matlab’s c ˙ ( t ) findpeaks function to detect the times t at which Ca i 2+ transients occurred. We set the minimum peak height to 1 s.d., where the s.d. was robustly estimated using: σ ¯ = median ( | r ˙ ( t ) | ) 0.6745 . We then computed the Ca 2+ transient-triggered average stimulus, weighting each sample by the steepness of the transient: F ( x , y , τ ) = 1 M ∑ i = 1 M c ˙ ( t i ) S ( x , y , t i + τ ) Here, is the stimulus, S ( x , y , t ) τ is the time lag (ranging from approx. −320 to 1,380 ms) and M is the number of Ca 2+ events. We smoothed this raw RF estimate using a 5×5 pixel Gaussian window for each time lag separately. RF maps shown correspond to a s.d. map, where the s.d. is calculated over time lags τ : F map ( x , y ) = S D [ F ( x , y , τ ) ] τ To extract the RF’s position and scale, we fitted it with a 2D Gaussian function using Matlab’s lsqcurvefit . The time course of the receptive field was estimated by the average of the 8 pixels closest to the fitted RF centre (according to the Mahalanobis distance) weighted by a Gaussian profile. RF quality ( F t c ( τ ) RF ) was measured as one minus the fraction of variance explained by the Gaussian fit qi , F ¯ map Q I RF = 1 − Var [ F map − F ¯ map ] VaI [ F map ] . Direction and orientation selectivity To extract time course and directional tuning of the Ca 2+ response to the moving bar stimulus, we performed a singular value decomposition (SVD) on the T by D normalised mean response matrix (times samples by number of directions; M ; T = 32 ; D = 8 Extended Data Fig. E7a ): [ U , S , V ] = svd ( M ) This procedure decomposes the response into a temporal component in the first column of and a direction dependent component or tuning curve in the first column of U , such that the response matrix can be approximated as an outer product of the two: V M ≈ S 11 U : 1 V : 1 T . An advantage of this procedure is that it does not require manual selection of time bins for computing direction tuning, but extracts the optimal direction tuning curve given the varying temporal dynamics of different neurons. To measure direction selectivity (DS) and its significance, we projected the tuning curve on a complex exponential V : 1 , where ϕ k = exp ( i k ) is the direction in the k-th condition: α k K = ϕ T V : 1 . This is mathematically equivalent to computing the vector sum in the 2D plane or computing the power in the first Fourier component. We computed a DS index as the resulting vector length correcting for the direction spacing. We additionally assessed the statistical significance of direction tuning using a permutation test DSi = | K | , . To this end, we created surrogate trials (i.e. stimulus repetitions) by shuffling the trial labels (i.e. destroying any relationship between condition and response), computed the tuning curve for each surrogate trial and projected it on the complex exponential 53 . Carrying out the procedure 1,000 times generated a null distribution for ϕ K , assuming no direction tuning. We used the percentile of the true K as the p-value for direction tuning ( Extended Data Fig. E7b ). Importantly, a large DSi does not necessarily result in a small p-value, e.g. in the case of large trial to trial variability. As a result, the DSi distributions of significantly and not significantly direction tuned neurons show substantial overlap ( Extended Data Fig. E7c,d ). Therefore, a simple threshold as a DS criterion (e.g. DSi > 0.4) does not provide a good separation into direction selective cell types and others. Orientation selectivity (OS) was assessed in an analogous way. However, we used the complex exponential , corresponding to the second Fourier component. ϕ k = exp ( 2 i k ) Other response measures Response quality index To measure how well a cell responded to a stimulus (chirp, moving bar, colour), we computed the signal-to-noise ratio where Q I = Var [ 〈 C 〉 r ] t 〈 Var [ C ] t 〉 r , is the C T by R response matrix (time samples by stimulus repetitions) and 〈 〉 x and denote the mean and variance across the indicated dimension, respectively. If all trials are identical such that the mean response is a perfect representative of the response, Var [ ] x QI is equal to 1. If all trials are completely random with fixed variance (so that the mean response is not informative about the individual trial responses at all), QI is proportional to 1/ R . For further analysis, we used only cells that responded well to the chirp and/or the moving bar stimulus ( or Q I chirp > .45 ). Q I DS > 0.6 Full-field index The full-field index was computed as comparing the response quality to a local stimulus (moving bar) and a global stimulus (chirp). FFi = Q I DS − Q I Chirp Q I DS + Q I Chirp , ON-OFF index ON-OFF preference was measured as where OOi = 〈 r ON 〉 t − 〈 r OFF 〉 t 〈 r ON 〉 t + 〈 r OFF 〉 t , r and ON r are defined as the activity during the response to the leading edge of the moving bar (the first 400 ms of the OFF response) and the trailing edge of the moving bar (the first 400 ms of the OFF response). OFF Colour selectivity index Colour selectivity was measured for the ON response using and for the OFF response using an analogous definition. Here, G B ON = max ( r ON , green 2 ) − max ( r ON , blue 2 ) max ( r ON , green 2 ) + max ( r ON , blue 2 ) r and ON,green r are the responses in a time window of 1,280 ms after onset of the green and blue stimulus, respectively. ON,blue Feature extraction We used sparse principle component analysis , as implemented in the SpaSM toolbox by K. Sjöstrang et al. ( 54 http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/projects/spasm/ ), to extract sparse response features from the responses to the chirp, colour, and moving bar stimulus, resulting in features which use only a small number of time bins. The extracted features are localised in time and therefore readily interpretable (e.g. “high-frequency feature”), although this constraint was not explicitly enforced by the algorithm ( Extended Data Fig. E2d ). We also explored alternative feature extraction techniques such as regular PCA, but these resulted in inferior cluster quality. In addition, they required manually defining regions corresponding to specific parts of the stimulus (e.g. frequency chirp) to yield localised and interpretable features. 2 We extracted 20 features with 10 non-zero time bins from the mean response to the chirp (averaging across trials) and 6 features with 10 non-zero time bins from the mean response to the colour stimulus. For the moving bar stimulus we extracted 8 features with 5 non-zero time bins from the response time course (see above) and 4 features with 6 non-zero time bins from its temporal derivative. All features were in the temporal domain, ensuring spatial invariance. In addition, we used two features from the time course of the RF, extracted with regular PCA. Overall, this procedure resulted in a 40 dimensional feature vector for each cell. Before clustering, we standardised each feature separately across the population of cells. Clustering DS and non-DS cells were clustered independently, classifying cells as DS if the permutation test resulted in P <0.05. We fit each data set with a Mixture of Gaussian model using the expectation-maximisation algorithm (Matlab’s gmdistribution object). We constrained the covariance matrix for each component to be diagonal, resulting in 80 parameters per component (40 for the mean, 40 for the variances). We further regularised the covariance matrix by adding a constant (10 −5 ) to the diagonal. To find the optimal number of clusters, we evaluated the Bayesian Information Criterion 55 where BIC = − 2 log L + M log N , L is the log-likelihood of the model, N is the number of cells and M is the number of parameters in the model, i.e. , where C is the number of clusters and the contributions that arose from means, variances and mixture proportions (which have to add to 1). Although other choices such as the Aikaike information criterion (AIC) would have been possible, we found the BIC to yield a good compromise between model complexity and quality, since the AIC is known to find to many clusters for large sample sizes. We also computed log Bayes factors as M = 81 C − 1 for each candidate cluster number to test how strong the evidence for further splitting is. Values > 6 were treated as strong evidence in favour of further splitting. The minimum of the BIC coincided well with the number of clusters after which there was no strong evidence for further adding more clusters. To avoid local minima, we restarted the EM algorithm 20 times per candidate number of clusters and used the solution with the largest likelihood. This procedure resulted in 24 and 48 clusters for DS and non-DS cells, respectively ( 2 Δ BIC Extended Data Fig. E2a ). To evaluate cluster quality, we rank-ordered the posterior probabilities for cluster assignment for each cluster, normalised for cluster size and averaged across clusters for non-DS and DS cells separately ( Extended Data Fig. E2b ). The steep decays of the sigmoidal functions indicate good cluster separability. To check how consistent the clustering was against subsampling of the data, we created 20 surrogate datasets containing random selections of 90% of the cells. We fit these surrogate datasets with a Mixture of Gaussians model with the optimal number of clusters determined on the original dataset. For each cluster mean in these models, we computed the correlations with the most similar cluster for the model fit on the original dataset. To summarise the similarity of clusterings, we computed the median correlation across clusters ( Extended Data Fig. E2c ). On average, the clusterings obtained on the surrogate and the original dataset were very similar (mean median correlation: 0.96 ± 0.19 and 0.97 ± 0.01; mean ± s.d.; for DS and non-DS cells separately). In addition, we performed an alternative clustering version, were we did not split the data in DS and non-DS cells but added DSi , OSi , soma and receptive field size as features. The identified clusters were very similar, but this strategy failed to identify most DS types as separate clusters, except for the ON-OFF DS cell. Therefore, we decided to first isolate significant DS cells and cluster them separately, before merging similarly responding DS- and non-DS clusters (see below), if we did not find a reason to keep the DS group as a separate RGC type. Nevertheless, a strategy equally justified as ours could start with the alternative clustering and then split those clusters containing significant fractions of DS cells. Automatic identification of RGCs and ACs A subset of cells was stained against GAD67 to identify dACs (see above). The intensity of this staining was manually rated as follows: −2 (absent), −1 (likely absent), 0 (uncertain), 1 (likely present), and 2 (present). For each cluster, we computed the average staining from the labelled cells (average number of cells with GAD67 information per cluster: 16.8± 10.0, mean ± s.d.). Clusters with an average staining <−0.2 were labelled RGCs ( n =30 clusters), those with average staining >0.2 were labelled ACs ( n =26). Clusters with average staining in between those values ( n =5), or those that contained 6 or less cells with GAD67 information ( n =8) were labelled as uncertain, unless other clear criteria such as soma size or genetic labels indicated that they are ACs or RGCs. In this case they were manually allocated to RGC or AC ( n =3 and n =2, respectively). Two clusters automatically classified as AC were included in the uncertain group due to its functional similarity with the OFF-suppressed types (G 31 ). This procedure resulted in 33 RGC clusters, 10 uncertain clusters and 26 AC clusters. Identification of alpha-RGCs We extracted all cells with large cell bodies (>136 μm²; mean +1 s.d. of total soma size distribution; Extended Data Fig. E2g,h ) from RGC and uncertain clusters. Predominantly, these cells had been assigned to nine of the clusters. We re-clustered those cells using a mixture of Gaussian model as described above, resulting in 16 clusters ( Extended Data Fig. E2h ). Receptive field size was not used in this process. Five of these clusters could be clearly associated with the three known alpha-RGC types and their response profiles (trans. OFF alpha, 2; sust. OFF alpha, 2; ON alpha, 1). Cells in these clusters were SMI-32-positive, as expected from alpha RGCs ( 31 Fig. 3f ). Likely, this procedure missed some alpha cells, as somata close to the edge of scan fields were cut and we thus underestimate the soma size of these cells (e.g. G 5 c, see also main text). Remaining cells were kept in their original cluster. Logistic regression was used to assess the effect cell type (alpha vs. mini) on SMI-32 staining (absent vs. present). We used the Matlab implementation fitglm with a binomial non-linearity. 95%-confidence intervals on the proportion of SMI32-positive cells were computed using bootstrapping with 1,000 samples. Dendrogram We used a standard linkage algorithm on the means of the RGC groups in the standardised feature space with correlation distance and average unweighted distance and plotted the result as a dendrogram (using Matlab functions d i j = 1 − corr ( m i , m j ) linkage and dendrogram ). The leaf order was optimised using the Matlab function optimalleaforder and modified for clarity of presentation. Calculation of coverage factor We calculated each group’s coverage factor (CF), with the number of cells in a group ( C F = n Cells ∗ A R F , median A Scan ), the median RF size ( n Cells ) within a group counting only cells that surpassed a RF quality criterion of 0.3, and the total scan area across all experiments ( A R F , median ). We corrected A Scan for 29% cells discarded by our quality criterion as well as an empirically estimated 8% of cells that did not yield a ROI in the first place due to weak or absent labelling. In addition, n Cells was corrected for an empirically estimated 34.8% RF overhang (=where a cell’s RF exceeds the scan field edge. This procedure yielded a CF 2.0 ± 0.7 for most RGC groups (Gaussian fit; see A Scan Fig. 2e , right ). However, differences between studies in approaches to measure RFs (e.g. checkerboards vs. bars), in the assumptions used for RF fitting (e.g. homogenous RFs best fitted by Gaussians), or in the methods to estimate dendritic arbour area can easily yield different absolute estimates of CF (cf. also SI Table 1 ). Estimation of IPL stratification profiles To determine a cell’s IPL stratification profile, we calculated dendritic density as described previously with spatial smoothing of 1 μm 10 3 . The resultant 3D density-cloud was projected on the Z-axis to estimate the mean IPL depth profile. The relationship between the depth profiles and the two ChAT bands was estimated in independent experiments using mice that express tdTomato in cholinergic ACs (ChAT Cre × Ai9:tdTomato). We compared the IPL depth of the tdTomato-labelled dendritic plexi to the two SR101-labelled blood vessel planes that line the inner retina. We estimated the error to be ~1.5 μm (s.d.), corresponding to 3–4% IPL depth ( n =13 measurements in 2 mice). To relate each cell’s IPL profile to functional groups we calculated the mean correlation coefficient between a cell’s response to the “chirp” and moving bar stimuli and each group’s mean response. The correlation coefficient (−1…1) for each pair was then multiplied with the cell’s depth profile and a correlation-rank based weighting factor . Thus, each individual recording yielded a complete two-dimensional map, with IPL depth on one axis and functional group on the other. Next, we averaged across the maps for those cells that passed our response quality criterion (n W = 0.9 rank − 1 (non-DS) = 31/51; n (DS) = 24/33; see above). The resultant matrices were normalised in two steps: First, we divided each group’s IPL depth profile by the mean depth profile of all included cells to eliminate any bias in sampling depth. Second, we divided each depth profile by its own maximum. This resulted in an automatic and unbiased estimate of dendritic stratification depth for all RGC groups ( Fig. 5 ). Note that this automated approach is based on a relatively small sample of reconstructed cells and therefore can only provide an approximate prediction of stratification levels. Notably, this approach is invariant to differences in lateral dendritic field dimensions that may be associated with retinal position (e.g. ). 10 , 23 Extended Data Figure E1 Linking electrophysiology and imaging data (related to Fig. 1 ) a , simultaneously recorded RGC Ca 2+ ( top ) and spiking ( bottom ) activity in response to binary spatial dense noise stimulation. b , average Ca 2+ event triggered by a single spike, averaged across n =6 cells (shading = 1 s.d.); event decay was fit (red) using a single exponential (for time constant τ, see inset, mean ± 1 s.d.) to yield an estimated impulse response. A linear prediction of Ca 2+ (calculated by convolution of the impulse response with binarised spike-traces) was compared to measured values to estimate the mean nonlinearity ( c ). d , Ca 2+ ( top ) and spiking ( bottom ) response to the full-field “chirp” stimulus ( Methods ) simultaneously recorded in an RGC (red trace, Ca 2+ signal predicted from spiking response). e , number of scan fields as a function of blue-green index (BGi, see Methods ) averaged over all ROIs in each field (cf. Fig. 1a ). 1 Figure E2 Clustering and grouping (related to Fig. 2 ) a–c . Selection of cluster size and cluster quality/consistency analysis. a , normalised Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) curves for non-DS (black) and DS (blue) cells. Arrows indicate the optimal numbers of clusters. b , rank-ordered posterior probability curves indicating cluster quality. Curves were normalised for cluster size and averaged for non-DS (black) and DS (blue) clusters separately. Shaded area indicates 1 s.d. across clusters. c , histogram of median correlation between the original clusters and clusters identified on 20 surrogate datasets, created by repeated subsampling of 90% of the original dataset (bootstrapping); for each cluster, the best matching cluster from the original clustering was selected. d , heat maps of Ca 2+ responses (d 1 ) to the 4 visual stimuli (cf. Fig. 1 ) of n =11,210 cells from 50 retinas. Shown are raw data sorted by the response to the colour stimulus. Each line represents responses of a single cell with activity colour-coded such that warmer colours represent increased activity. Temporal features (d 2 ) were extracted from the cells’ light responses ( Methods ) and used for automatic clustering (d 1 → e 1 ). e , heat maps showing clustered data (e 1 , n =72 clusters plus cells discarded based on signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio), with block height representing the number of included cells. Distributions of S/N (e 2 , top ) and GAD67 labelling (e 2 , bottom ) used to discard clusters and sort the remaining ones into retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), “uncertain” RGCs and displaced amacrine cells (dACs). f , heat maps showing n =46 groups (divided into n =32 RGC groups, including n =4 “uncertain” ones, and n =14 dAC groups; sorted by response similarities) after re-clustering of large-soma cells (alpha cell post-processing, see panels g,h). g , distribution of region of interest (ROI) area (as proxy for soma size) for all cells classified as RGCs and “uncertain” (e 2 ). Inset : same distribution but on a log-scale. Dashed line marks threshold to separating large-soma cells ( Methods ). h , results of re-clustering of large-soma cells (from g): heat maps show light-evoked Ca 2+ responses to the 4 visual stimuli (cf. Fig. 1b ). Clusters that resulted in new RGC groups are indicated; the remaining cells stayed with their original clusters. Figure E3 Group overview – Functional groups classified as “uncertain” RGCs and displaced amacrine cell (dAC) in the mouse retina (related to Fig. 2 ) a , clusters organised according to hierarchical trees (dendrograms, see Methods ) and grouped based on functional similarity (see main text for details), resulting in n =4 “uncertain” RGC ( top ) and n =14 dAC groups ( bottom ). b , mean Ca 2+ responses to the 4 stimuli (cf. Fig. 1b ) for each cluster. c , histograms of selected properties, from left to right : ROI (soma) area, receptive field (RF) diameter (2 s.d. from Gaussian fit; see Fig. 1b and 1 Fig. E4 ), DS and OS indices ( DSi and OSi , respectively, Methods ). For details on each cluster, see also SI Data 1 (“uncertain”), and 40–49 SI Data 1 (dACs). 50–75 d , example experiment ( left , from Fig. 1a ); 2 centre : showing dACs (lilac) and “uncertain” RGCs (blue); right : colour-coded by broad categories, as in (e). e , total number of cells ( top ) and percentage of cells in sets of groups ( bottom ) per experiment (only experiments with ≥198 cells) illustrating consistency across experiments. Scale bar: d, 50 μm. Figure E4 Relationship between RGC receptive field centres and their dendritic arbours (related to Fig. 2 ) a , receptive field (RF) centre maps of a G 8 transient OFF alpha RGC (a 1 ) and a G 2 small-field RGC (a 2 ), with their reconstructed morphologies overlaid. 1- and 2-s.d. contours of RF centres fitted with 2D Gaussians are indicated by blue and red ovals, respectively. b , area of RF centre fits from (a) as function of dendritic arbour area ( n =18 RGCs). Scale bar: 100 μm. Figure E5 Mapping RGC groups onto genetic types – Functional diversity of PV- and Pcp2-positive RGCs (related to Fig. 2 ) a , diversity of PV-positive RGCs (red) in a PV:tdTomato mouse retina electroporated with OGB-1 (a 1 , green). Ca 2+ responses and receptive fields (a 2 ) from 6 PV-positive cells in exemplary field are shown (black, mean response, grey, single trials). The top four cells could be clearly matched to RGC groups (cf. Fig. 2 ), whereas the remaining two (x 1 , x 2 ) were discarded due to the lack of responses to both full-field and moving bar stimuli; note, however that both cells yielded a clear RF. b , Ca 2+ responses of functionally distinct PV-RGC groups (20 response types PV a-t, thereof 14 with n ≥ 3 cells). Traces colour-coded by group assignment (colours as in Fig. 2 ) represent mean responses, with individual cell responses in grey. c , same for Pcp2-positive (6 response types Pcp2 a-f, thereof 3 with n ≥ 3 cells) RGC groups. d , table illustrating the relationship between RGC groups ( Fig. 2 ) and functional PV- and Pcp2-positive RGC types from (a,b). Numbers represent the total cell count of each allocation. Names in quotes (e.g. “PV5”) refer to the cells’ original names (see PV- and Pcp2-study 45 ). 56 Figure E6 Examples of RGC groups a , functional “fingerprint” of G 10 RGCs, identified as local-edge-detector (W3) cells. Light-evoked Ca 2+ responses of n =149 cells (a 1 ): heat maps ( top ) illustrating individual responses, with response averages and firing rates estimated from Ca 2+ signals (cf. Fig. E1a–d ) below. Ganglion cell layer (a 2 ; experiment from Fig. 1a ) with G 2 10 somata (green) and receptive fields (RFs, dotted) indicated. Grey circles mark cells with RFs that passed a quality criterion ( Methods ). Example morphology of a G 10 cell filled after electrical single-cell recording (a 3 , cf. b). For a complete summary of the group’s properties, see SI Data 2 . 10 b , electrical single-cell recording of a G 10 cell: spiking responses as raster plots and mean spike rates for “chirp”, moving bar and blue/green stimuli as well as time kernel derived from noise stimulus (b 1 ), polar plot of responses to moving bar (b 2 ) and RF map (b 3 ) c , G 1,2 28a,b ( n =100) contrast-suppressed ON RGCs with sample morphology (c 3 ; G 28a,b cell dye-injected after Ca 2+ imaging). d , electrical single-cell recording of a contrast-suppressed ON RGC with different morphology (d 1,2 3 vs. c 3 ). e,f , G 2 direction-selective OFF RGCs ( n =162) that stratify between the ChAT bands (e 3 ), as fingerprint (e 1,2 ) and exemplary electrical single-cell recording (f 1–3 ). Scale bars: 50 μm; grey lines in a 3 ,c 3 ,d 3 ,e 3 : ChAT bands. Figure E7 Direction and orientation selectivity (related to Fig. 4 ) a , (a 1 ) stimulus direction vs. time map for an exemplary direction selective RGC with temporal ( top ) and directional ( right ) activation profiles shown; Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) was used to estimate the time-course and tuning function; individual stimulus repeats in grey, average in black. (a 2 ) Reconstruction of direction vs. time map based on time course and tuning function of extracted by SVD. b , statistical significance testing for direction selectivity (DS) or orientation selectivity (OS) was performed by projecting the direction/orientation profile on a single (for DS) or double (for OS) period cosine (blue) and the magnitude of the projection to the distribution of projections obtained by randomly permuting tuning-angles from the original data (grey; bootstrapping). The p-value is obtained by computing the percentile of the data (blue) in the bootstrap distribution (grey). c , d , p-values for direction (c) and orientation (d) tuning as function of the respective selectivity index ( top , scatter plot; bottom , histogram; black, non-DS cells; light blue, DS cells; dark blue, OS cells). Note that tuning probability (p DS , p OS ) only partially predicted tuning strength ( DSi , OSi ). e , pairs of polar plots showing the distribution of preferred motion directions for all direction-selective (DS) RGCs together and for all DS RGC groups not shown in Fig. 4 , (V, ventral; N, nasal direction; same group colour code as in Fig. 2 ). Top plot of each pair: the cells’ individual preferred directions, with line length representing DSi and line grey level p(DS) ( Methods ). Bottom plot of each pair: circular histogram of preferred direction. f , like (a) but for orientation-selective (OS) RGCs. g–i , exemplary OS RGCs, illustrating the functional diversity within G 17 (local ON trans. OS cells); none of them display strong full-field responses (g 1 ,h 1 ,i 1 , left ). A “vertically-tuned” ON OS cell (g 2 , left ) that shows little tuning to a dark moving bar (g 2 , right ; g 3 , another example). Note the lobular structures bracketing the RF centre (coloured RF maps in g 4 ). Two examples for “horizontally-tuned” ON OS cells (h 2,3 ) with their respective RF maps (h 4 ). ON OS cell that shows weak tuning to bright moving bars (i 1 , left ) but strong OS to stationary bright and dark bars (i 2–4 , centre and right , respectively; Methods ). Figure E8 Retinal distribution of PV-positive cells in the PV Cre × Ai9 tdTomato mouse line (related to Fig. 2 ) a,b , density map (a) and magnified sample areas (b) illustrate PV-labelling anisotropy. Figure E9 Mapping RGC groups to morphologies a–c , exemplary morphologies of RGCs filled after electrical recording or Ca 2+ imaging and subsequently clustered/sorted into specific RGC groups or discarded (c, right ) based on their light response S/N. Scale bars: 50 μm. Figure E10 RGC groups cover a basic feature space a,b , relationship of four basic response indices of RGC groups. Disc-area shows group size. Indices capture preference for stimulus polarity (ON-OFF index; Methods ), for high vs. low temporal frequencies and contrasts (see below), as well as the full-field index (FFi; Methods ), which reflects response preference for global (full-field “chirp”) versus local (moving-bar) stimulation. Contrast- and Frequency-indices represent contrasts of feature activation ( ) at respective time points during the full-field “chirp” stimulus, with j=12, k=9 for frequency, and j=17, k=15 for contrast. Before calculating ratios, feature activation ( ( F j − F k ) / ( F j + F k ) F ) was normalised (0…1) by passing values through a cumulative normal distribution. Supplementary Material 1 2 3 4 We thank Gordon Eske for technical support and H.S. Seung, P.R. Martin, and A.S. Tolias for discussion. This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) (Werner Reichardt Centre for Integrative Neuroscience Tübingen, EXC 307 to M.B. and T.E.; BA 5283/1-1 to T.B.; BE 5601/1-1 to P.B.), the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) (BCCN Tübingen, FKZ 01GQ1002 to M.B. and T.E.), the BW-Stiftung (AZ 1.16101.09 to T.B.), the intramural f ortüne-program of the University of Tübingen (2125-0-0 to T.B.) and the National Institute Of Neurological Disorders And Stroke of the National Institutes of Health (U01NS090562 to T.E.). AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS TB, PB, MB and TE designed the study; KF performed imaging experiments with help by TB; KF and MRR performed electrophysiological experiments with help by TB; TB, PB, KF and MRR performed pre-processing; PB developed the clustering framework with help of MB; TB and PB analysed the data with input from TE; TB, PB and TE wrote the manuscript. AUTHOR INFORMATION Data (original data, clustering and grouping results) as well as Matlab code for visualization are available from http://www.retinal-functomics.org . Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints . The authors declare no competing financial interests. Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature . 1 Masland RH The neuronal organization of the retina Neuron 76 266 280 2012 23083731 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.002 PMC3714606 2 Euler T Haverkamp S Schubert T Baden T Retinal bipolar cells: elementary building blocks of vision Nat Rev Neurosci 15 507 19 2014 25158357 10.1038/nrn3783 3 Lettvin J Maturana H McCulloch W Pitts W What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain Proc IRE 47 1940 1951 1959 4 Werblin FS Dowling JE Organization of the retina of the mudpuppy, Necturus maculosus. II Intracellular recording J Neurophysiol 32 339 355 1969 4306897 10.1152/jn.1969.32.3.339 5 Cleland BG Levick WR Brisk and sluggish concentrically organized ganglion cells in the cat’s retina J Physiol 240 421 456 1974 4421622 10.1113/jphysiol.1974.sp010617 PMC1331023 6 Barlow HB Hill RM Levick WR Rabbit retinal ganglion cells responding selectively to direction and speed of image motion in the rabbit J Physiol 173 377 407 1964 14220259 10.1113/jphysiol.1964.sp007463 PMC1368915 7 Devries SH Baylor DA Mosaic arrangement of ganglion cell receptive fields in rabbit retina J Neurophysiol 78 2048 2060 1997 9325372 10.1152/jn.1997.78.4.2048 8 Farrow K Masland RH Physiological clustering of visual channels in the mouse retina J Neurophysiol 105 1516 30 2011 21273316 10.1152/jn.00331.2010 PMC3075295 9 Coombs J van der List D Wang GY Chalupa LM Morphological properties of mouse retinal ganglion cells Neuroscience 140 123 36 2006 16626866 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.02.079 10 Sümbül U A genetic and computational approach to structurally classify neuronal types Nat Commun 5 3512 2014 24662602 10.1038/ncomms4512 PMC4164236 11 Völgyi B Chheda S Bloomfield SA Tracer coupling patterns of the ganglion cell subtypes in the mouse retina J Comp Neurol 512 664 87 2009 19051243 10.1002/cne.21912 PMC3373319 12 Kong JH Fish DR Rockhill RL Masland RH Diversity of ganglion cells in the mouse retina: unsupervised morphological classification and its limits J Comp Neurol 489 293 310 2005 16025455 10.1002/cne.20631 13 Rowe MH Stone J Naming of neurones. Classification and naming of cat retinal ganglion cells Brain Behav Evol 14 185 216 1977 856398 10.1159/000125660 14 Seung HS Sümbül U Neuronal Cell Types and Connectivity: Lessons from the Retina Neuron 83 1262 1272 2014 25233310 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.054 PMC4206525 15 Sanes JR Masland RH The Types of Retinal Ganglion Cells: Current Status and Implications for Neuronal Classification Annu Rev Neurosci 38 221 46 2015 25897874 10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034120 16 Rodieck RW Brening RK Retinal ganglion cells: properties, types, genera, pathways and trans-species comparisons Brain Behav Evol 23 121 64 1983 6320950 10.1159/000121492 17 Robles E Laurell E Baier H The Retinal Projectome Reveals Brain-Area-Specific Visual Representations Generated by Ganglion Cell Diversity Curr Biol 24 2085 96 2014 25155513 10.1016/j.cub.2014.07.080 18 Morin LP Studholme KM Retinofugal projections in the mouse J Comp Neurol 522 3733 53 2014 24889098 10.1002/cne.23635 PMC4142087 19 Briggman KL Euler T Bulk electroporation and population calcium imaging in the adult mammalian retina J Neurophysiol 105 2601 2609 2011 21346205 10.1152/jn.00722.2010 20 Euler T Eyecup scope-optical recordings of light stimulus-evoked fluorescence signals in the retina Pflugers Arch 457 1393 1414 2008 19023590 10.1007/s00424-008-0603-5 PMC3037819 21 Wang YV Weick M Demb B Spectral and temporal sensitivity of cone-mediated responses in mouse retinal ganglion cells J Neurosci 31 7670 7681 2011 21613480 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0629-11.2011 PMC3122925 22 Baden T A tale of two retinal domains: near-optimal sampling of achromatic contrasts in natural scenes through asymmetric photoreceptor distribution Neuron 80 1206 1217 2013 24314730 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.09.030 23 Bleckert A Schwartz GW Turner MH Rieke F Wong ROL Visual space is represented by nonmatching topographies of distinct mouse retinal ganglion cell types Curr Biol 24 310 5 2014 24440397 10.1016/j.cub.2013.12.020 PMC3990865 24 Kim IJ Zhang Y Yamagata M Meister M Sanes JR Molecular identification of a retinal cell type that responds to upward motion Nature 452 478 482 2008 18368118 10.1038/nature06739 25 Zhang Y Kim IJ Sanes JR Meister M The most numerous ganglion cell type of the mouse retina is a selective feature detector Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 E2391 8 2012 22891316 10.1073/pnas.1211547109 PMC3437843 26 Schlamp CL Evaluation of the percentage of ganglion cells in the ganglion cell layer of the rodent retina Mol Vis 19 1387 96 2013 23825918 PMC3695759 27 Berson DM Castrucci AM Provencio I Morphology and mosaics of melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion cell types in mice J Comp Neurol 518 2405 22 2010 20503419 10.1002/cne.22381 PMC2895505 28 Ecker JL Melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion-cell photoreceptors: Cellular diversity and role in pattern vision Neuron 67 49 60 2010 20624591 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.05.023 PMC2904318 29 Lim EJ Kim IB Oh SJ Chun MH Identification and characterization of SMI32-immunoreactive amacrine cells in the mouse retina Neurosci Lett 424 199 202 2007 17723270 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.07.046 30 Armañanzas R Ascoli GA Towards the automatic classification of neurons Trends Neurosci 38 307 318 2015 25765323 10.1016/j.tins.2015.02.004 PMC4417416 31 Van Wyk M Wässle H Taylor WR Receptive field properties of ON- and OFF-ganglion cells in the mouse retina Vis Neurosci 26 297 308 2009 19602302 10.1017/S0952523809990137 PMC2874828 32 Weng S Sun W He S Identification of ON-OFF direction-selective ganglion cells in the mouse retina J Physiol 562 915 923 2005 15564281 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.076695 PMC1665532 33 Sun W Deng Q Levick WR He S ON direction-selective ganglion cells in the mouse retina J Physiol 576 197 202 2006 16901944 10.1113/jphysiol.2006.115857 PMC1995646 34 Tien NW Pearson JT Heller CR Demas J Kerschensteiner D Genetically Identified Suppressed-by-Contrast Retinal Ganglion Cells Reliably Signal Self-Generated Visual Stimuli J Neurosci 35 10815 10820 2015 26224863 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1521-15.2015 PMC4518055 35 Oyster CW Barlow HB Direction-selective units in rabbit retina: distribution of preferred directions Science (80-) 155 841 2 1967 10.1126/science.155.3764.841 6019094 36 Levick WR Receptive fields and trigger features of ganglion cells in the visual streak of the rabbits retina J Physiol 188 285 307 1967 6032202 10.1113/jphysiol.1967.sp008140 PMC1396015 37 Sivyer B Taylor WR Vaney DI Uniformity detector retinal ganglion cells fire complex spikes and receive only light-evoked inhibition Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 5628 5633 2010 20212117 10.1073/pnas.0909621107 PMC2851809 38 Nikolaev A Leung KM Odermatt B Lagnado L Synaptic mechanisms of adaptation and sensitization in the retina Nat Neurosci 16 934 941 2013 23685718 10.1038/nn.3408 PMC3924174 39 Vaney DI Sivyer B Taylor WR Direction selectivity in the retina: symmetry and asymmetry in structure and function Nat Rev Neurosci 13 194 208 2012 22314444 10.1038/nrn3165 40 Rivlin-Etzion M Transgenic mice reveal unexpected diversity of on-off direction-selective retinal ganglion cell subtypes and brain structures involved in motion processing J Neurosci 31 8760 9 2011 21677160 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0564-11.2011 PMC3139540 41 Zhao X Chen H Liu X Cang J Orientation-selective responses in the mouse lateral geniculate nucleus J Neurosci 33 12751 63 2013 23904611 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0095-13.2013 PMC3728687 42 Feinberg EH Meister M Orientation columns in the mouse superior colliculus Nature 2014 10.1038/nature14103 25517100 43 Hippenmeyer S A developmental switch in the response of DRG neurons to ETS transcription factor signaling PLoS Biol 3 e159 2005 15836427 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030159 PMC1084331 44 Lewis PM Gritli-Linde A Smeyne R Kottmann A McMahon AP Sonic hedgehog signaling is required for expansion of granule neuron precursors and patterning of the mouse cerebellum Dev Biol 270 393 410 2004 15183722 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.03.007 45 Farrow K Ambient illumination toggles a neuronal circuit switch in the retina and visual perception at cone threshold Neuron 78 325 338 2013 23541902 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.02.014 46 Roska B Werblin F Vertical interactions across ten parallel, stacked representations in the mammalian retina Nature 410 583 587 2001 11279496 10.1038/35069068 47 Baden T Berens P Bethge M Euler T Spikes in mammalian bipolar cells support temporal layering of the inner retina Curr Biol 23 48 52 2013 23246403 10.1016/j.cub.2012.11.006 48 Macosko EZ Highly Parallel Genome-wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells Using Nanoliter Droplets Cell 161 1202 1214 2015 26000488 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002 PMC4481139 49 Denk W Horstmann H Serial block-face scanning electron microscopy to reconstruct three-dimensional tissue nanostructure PLoS Biol 2 e329 2004 15514700 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020329 PMC524270 50 Krizhevsky A Sutskever I Hinton GE ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 1 9 2012 51 Rossi J Melanocortin-4 receptors expressed by cholinergic neurons regulate energy balance and glucose homeostasis Cell Metab 13 195 204 2011 21284986 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.01.010 PMC3033043 52 Breuninger T Puller C Haverkamp S Euler T Chromatic bipolar cell pathways in the mouse retina J Neurosci 31 6504 6517 2011 21525291 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0616-11.2011 PMC6622657 53 Ecker ASS State Dependence of Noise Correlations in Macaque Primary Visual Cortex Neuron 82 235 248 2014 24698278 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.02.006 PMC3990250 54 Zou H Hastie T Tibshirani R Sparse Principal Component Analysis J Comput Graph Stat 15 265 286 2006 55 Fraley C Raftery A Model-based clustering, discriminant analysis, and density estimation J Am Stat 97 611 631 2002 56 Ivanova E Hwang GS Pan ZH Characterization of transgenic mouse lines expressing Cre recombinase in the retina Neuroscience 165 233 243 2010 19837136 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.10.021 PMC2790531 Figure 1 Data collection a , whole-mounted mouse retina, electroporated with OGB-1 and recorded with a two-photon microscope (64×64 pixel @ 7.8 Hz) in the GCL. Scan fields (a 1 , left; 110×110 μm) comprised 80 ± 20 cells. Regions-of-interest (ROIs) (a 1 , right ), were placed semi-automatically. Montage (a 2 ) of 9 consecutively recorded fields (rectangles; a 1 in red). b , Ca 2+ signals from 7 ROIs colour-coded in (a 1 ). Single trials in grey, averages of n =4 (“chirp”, green/blue) or 24 (moving bars) trials in black (b 1 ). Responses to 4 visual stimuli (b 1 ): Full-field “chirp”, bright bars moving in 8 directions, full-field alternating green/blue and binary noise for space-time kernels. Direction- and orientation-selectivity (b 2 ): Traces by motion direction; polar plot of peak response, vector sum in red. c , left : experiment in (a) immunostained for GAD67 (green; GABAergic ACs) and ChAT (red; starburst-ACs). Right : from (a 1 ); both images show same colour-coded ROIs ( left , dots, right , ROI outlines) and starburst-ACs (white dots): cell 6 is GAD67-positive, cell 7 is a starburst-AC. d , OGB-1 (green) electroporated retina from transgenic mice with tdTomato (red) expressed in sets of RGCs ( top : PV; bottom : Pcp2). e , simultaneous Ca 2+ imaging and electrical recording: dye-filled, anatomically reconstructed cell (e 1 , top : whole-mount; bottom : profile, lines mark ChAT bands). Light responses (e 2 ) from top to bottom : spike raster and rate (20 ms bins), recorded (black) and reconstructed (orange) Ca 2+ signal. Scale bars: 50 μm unless indicated. Figure 2 Functional RGC types of the mouse retina a , cluster-dendrogram ( Methods ) with groups indicated: n =28 RGC and n =4 “uncertain” RGC groups. b , cluster-mean Ca 2+ responses to the 4 stimuli. c , selected metrics, from left to right : ROI (soma) area, receptive field (RF) diameter (2 s.d. of Gaussian), DS-index and OS-index ( Methods ). Background-histograms demarcate all RGCs. d , experiment ( left , from Fig. 1a ) with RGCs colour-coded by group ( 2 right ). dACs and discarded cells not shown. e , Coverage factor (CF) calculated from RF-area for RGC groups, with horizontal divisions delineating individual clusters ( left ) and distribution of CFs across groups ( right ). Scale bar in d, 50 μm. Figure 3 Classical alpha RGCs and their “mini” counterparts a , functional “fingerprint” of classical transient OFF alpha cells (G 8a,b ). Light-evoked Ca 2+ responses of n =80 cells (a 1 ): heat-maps ( top ) of individual responses, response averages and firing rates estimated from Ca 2+ signals below (cf. Extended Data Fig. E1 ). a , 2 left , G 8a,b somata (yellow) and receptive fields (RFs, dotted) indicated in example experiment (cf. Fig. 1a ). Grey circles mark cells with RFs above quality criterion ( 2 Methods ). Sample morphology of a G 8a,b cell filled after electrical single-cell recording (a 2 , right ). For details, see SI Data 2 . 8 b , G 1,2 9 RGCs ( n =68), dubbed transient OFF mini alpha because of their similarity in light response to G 8a,b RGCs (cf. a 1,2 ). c , G 1,2 24 RGCs ( n =44), identified as classical ON alpha. d , G 1,2 23 RGCs ( n =113), dubbed ON mini alpha (cf. c 1,2 ). Mini alphas have smaller RF diameters than classical alphas (median in μm, 95% confidence interval): G 9 ,280 (270–293) versus G 8 , 306 (294–315) with p=0.01232), and G 23 , 236 (218–256) versus G 24 , 319 (290–352) with p=0.00026 (rank-sum test). e , overlay of OGB-1-stained cells (green) and SMI-32 (magenta). SMI-32-positive RGCs include classical alphas (e 1 , solid contours; n.r. indicates a non-responsive cell), one large-soma non-alpha cell (green, dotted contour) as well as weakly-labeled ON-OFF DS cells (dashed contours) and starburst-ACs (asterisks). Mini alpha cells (blue, dotted contours) are SMI-32-negative. Chirp-evoked Ca 2+ responses (e 2 ) for 5 cells in (e 1 ). f , SMI-32 statistics (OFF tr.: alpha, n =16, mini, n =3; ON: alpha, n =6, mini, n =15; OFF sus. alpha, n =14; ON tr. large, n =7; other, n =957; means with 95% confidence intervals, **, p≤0.01; ****, p≤0.0001, logistic regression). Figure 4 Direction- and orientation-selectivity a , pairs of retinocentric polar plots showing distributions of preferred motion directions of selected direction-selective (DS) RGC groups (V, ventral; N, nasal). Top , plot of each pair: preferred directions, with length representing DSi and grey level p(DS) ( Methods ). Bottom , plot of each pair: circular area-normalised histogram. b , like (a), selected orientation-selective (OS) RGCs. Further DS/OS groups detailed in Extended Data Fig. E7 . c , motion directions in the visual space of the mouse. Figure 5 Mapping RGC groups to morphologies Heat map of each RGC group’s estimated dendritic stratification across the IPL (cf. Fig. 2 ); ON/OFF sublaminae and ChAT bands indicated. Warmer colours represent higher dendritic densities ( Methods ). Shaded IPL profiles indicate deviation from known stratification pattern (G 6 ) or an unexpected pattern given a potentially novel group’s response polarity (G 11,18,19 ).
