Downloaded 95355 bytes of XML
Extracted 64571 chars of body text
--- FIRST 3000 chars ---
### MATERIALS AND METHODS
Adult albino rabbits were deeply anesthetized with injections of urethane (1.5 g/kg intraperitoneally), then humanely killed by intracardial injection of 5 cc urethane following removal of the eyes. All procedures were in accordance with the guidelines of the University of Texas at Houston Animal Welfare Committee. Some retinas were removed from the sclera and placed on a black membrane filter, ganglion cell side up, inserted into a perfusion chamber (Warner Instruments, Hamden, CT) and then placed on the stage of an Olympus BX50WI upright epifluorescent microscope. Other retinas were cut into pieces and placed into the perfusion chamber with the sclera attached. The tissue was superfused during the experiment with Ames medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) bubbled with 95%O 2 / 5% CO 2 .
Ganglion cells were stained by application of a few drops of the nuclear fluorescent stain acridine orange (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) dissolved in Ames medium (Sigma-Aldrich) and applied to the retina as needed to visualize the ganglion cell population. With experience, several ganglion cell classes can be targeted, including the two types described in this study. The ON DS ganglion cells have medium large, slightly ovular somas with nuclei that fill about half the soma. For one of the types, the contrast between the cytoplasm and nucleus, which is usually in the middle of the cell, often gives the cell a crescent appearance ( Ackert et al., 2006 ), while the nucleus in the other type is more often located at one end of the soma.
Loose patch recordings were made with 1.2 mm borosilicate glass pulled to a resistance of 4–6 MΩ on a Brown-Flaming horizontal micropipette puller (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA, P-97) and filled with Ames medium and 0.2% pyranine (Sigma-Aldrich). Recordings were made with an NPI EPC-03X amplifier (ALA Scientific, Westbury, NY) at 1,000× gain and notch filtered at 60 Hz. Data was acquired and analyzed using Experimenter 5.0 (DataWave Technology, Berthoud, CO). Recorded cells were filled with Neurobiotin using a sharp electrode as described below.
For intracellular staining, thinwall glass microelectrodes were tip-filled with 0.5% Lucifer Yellow-CH (L-453, Invitrogen) and 3.5% Neurobiotin (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA) in 50 mM phosphate buffer (PB) and backfilled with 3M LiCl. Lucifer Yellow was iontophoresed with 1 nA negative current for a few seconds to verify cell penetration, then each ganglion cell was filled with Neurobiotin (+ 1 nA, 3 Hz, 10 minutes). Following injection, the tissue was superfused for at least an additional 30 minutes, then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.4, for 1 hour at room temperature. Cells were visualized by overnight incubation in 1:1,000 streptavidin-Cy3 (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA). Tissue was mounted in 50% 0.2M PBS + 50% glycerol +0.1% para-phenylenediamine (Sigma) to retard fading by fluorescent illumination.
Each gangli
